The Staircase Ascending to Khecara
A Praise in Accord with the Arrangement of the Realm of Holy Nāro Khecarī
by Ngorchen Konchok Lhundrup

om svasti
Oṃ svasti!
sé ché gyalwa kün gyi rab ngakpé
With the highest of praise from all conquerors and sons,
drangmé ma dang khandrö tenpé né
To the dwelling of innumerable ḍākinīs,
dorjé tsünmo chok gi podrang ché
The great celestial palace of the supreme Vajra Queen;
kha la chöpé né der güpé dü
With devotion I pay homage to the Realm of Khecara.

di né teng gi chok su rab dröpar
Ascending in a direction high above here,
pema ragé sa shyi dalwé ü
In the middle of a ground strewn with rubies,
choktsam tamché rinpoche lé drub
Completely constructed of jewels in every direction;
sa shyi khyepar pak der solwa deb
To that special sublime Realm I pay homage.

dé ü rinchen nga lé lek drubpé
In the middle of that, well made from the five gems,
khachö wangmö yeshe khang chenpo
Is the great celestial palace of the powerful Khecarī,
dru shyi go shyi tok pub rim sum tser
With four sides, four doors, lintels, three floors and a pinnacle;
dorjé tok gi dzé der solwa deb
To that, with a vajra peak, I pay homage.

shyalmé khang ü chöjung nyi tsek dang
In the middle of the celestial palace are two dharmākaras — stacked.
pema nyima jikjé dü tsen teng
Above a lotus, sun, Bhairava and Kālarātrī,
dak gi yidam dorjé naljormar
Is my iṣṭadevatā — Vajrayoginī,
tsen dang pé jé bar der solwa deb
Blazing with the marks and examples; I pay homage.

shyal chik chak nyi chen sum gyendu zik
With one face, two hands and three eyes gazing upward,
yepé driguk yönpé töpa dang
Beautiful with a curved knife in the right, skullcup in the left,
yön gyi drumor kha tam ga yi dzé
And a khaṭvāṅga on the left shoulder,
chakgya nga yi tré der solwa deb
Beautiful with the five mudrās; I pay homage.

shyalmé khang gi teng giwa gam nang
Inside the dome of the upper celestial palace,
na ro tapa la chen tsewa ché
Is the great guru Nāropa, Tsewa Che,
tsar chen chö kyi gyalpo lasokpa
The Lord of Dharma Tsarchen and the like;
gyüpé tsok kyi dzé der solwa deb
To the beautiful lineal host, I pay homage.

podrang teng mar tsawé lama dang
Atop the palace is the root guru,
yermé rikdak sangye dorjé chö
Non-differentiated from the Family Lord — Buddha Vajradharma,
kudok marpo dordril tukkar nol
With a body red in colour, holding to the heart a vajra and bell;
kyab sum düpé ngowor solwa deb
To the gathered essence of the Three Refuges, I pay homage.

shyalmé khang gi khyam sok chok küntu
In the courtyard and surroundings of the celestial palace,
kha la chöpé pawo khandrö tsok
Are a host of vīras and ḍākinīs — moving in the sky,
trin gyi pungpo tib tar shyukpa kün
All dwelling like a gathering of massive clouds,
dak la tsewé gong der solwa deb
Thinking of me with love; I pay homage.

detar dak gi tserab tamché du
Therefore in all my lifetimes,
nyewar tenpé jetsün naljorma
Relying closely on Vajrayoginī,
ten dang tenpar chepa tamché la
The basis and supported all together;
changchub bardu güpé kyab su chi
Until enlightenment, with devotion I go for refuge.

chi nang sangwé chötrin gyatsö chö
Presenting an ocean of offering clouds, outer, inner, and secret,
lü ngak yi kyi diktung sosor shak
With body, speech and mind, confessing every sin and fault,
kyé pak gewa kün la jé yi rang
Verbally rejoicing in all the merit of Noble Beings,
tekchen chö kyi khorlo korwar kul
The turning of the Dharma Wheel of the Supreme Vehicle I encourage.

nya ngen mi da tenpar shyuk su sol
I request you remain and not dwell in nirvana.
gé tsok lamé changchub chenpor ngo
Dedicating the merit accumulated to the highest great enlightenment.
deng né zung té tserab tamché du
Beginning from this day forward, in all lifetimes,
dorjé tsün mö nyewar kyang du sol
I request Vajra Queen, closely guard.

khachö shying tso chi yi naljorma
Mistress of the Khecara Realm — Outer Yoginī,
nyingkhé bam yik nang gi tsünmo ché
Letter VAṂ of the heart — Inner Yoginī,
saltong zungjuk dön gyi naljorma
Union of clarity-emptiness — Ultimate Yoginī,
rang ngoshé né khachö dröpar shok
Recognizing self, may I ascend to Khecara.

namshyik gyumé kyé chen dekpé tsé
At the time of the illusion of the great being, the support of life,
ten gyi kyab chik khachö wangmo dé
To that one complete refuge, Mistress of Khecara,
dzumpé shyin dang luyang rolmö dré
Smiling, with the sounds of melodious song and music;
dakpé shying der tripar dzé du sol
To that pure realm I pray lead me.

The praise in accord with the arrangement of the realm of Holy Khechari, 'The Staircase Ascending
to Khecara,' was written by Chatral Lhundrub at the exhortation of those demonstrating
intelligence and possessing undivided faith in the Vajra Queen. May this be of Benefit
to limitless beings.

| Translated by Jeff Watt, 1998. Reproduced with permission.