The Method of Accomplishment of Ārya Avalokiteśvara
The Practice of Great Compassion & Mahāmudrā in Union
by the Omniscient Könchok Lhundrub

Namo guru ratnavardhāya!1
dak dang drowa kham sum namkha yi
I and others,
ta dang nyampé semchen malüpa
All beings equal to space,
dü di né ni changchub matob bar
From this time forth until the heart of enlightenment is reached;
chok chu dü sum deshek tamché kyi
To the holy Root Guru and Lineage,
ku sung tuk dang yönten trinlé nam
Essence of all body, speech, mind, qualities and activities
chik tu düpa sangye kün gyi ngö
Of all tathāgatas of the ten directions and three times;
chö pung gyé tri shyi tong jungwé né
Source of the eighty-four thousand articles of Dharma
pakpé gendün kün gyi ngadak ché
And master of all the noble Sangha;
After:
palden tsa gyü lamé tsok nam la
In the collection of glorious root and lineage Gurus,
go sum güpa chenpö kyab su chi
Through the three doors with great devotion, I go for refuge.
pang tok tarchin tönpa sangye la
In the Buddha, teacher, having completely abandoned and realized,
go sum güpa chenpö kyab su chi
Through the three doors I go for refuge.
lungtok daknyi tenpa damchö la
In the holy Dharma, essence of the teaching of scripture and realization,
go sum güpa chenpö kyab su chi
Through the three doors I go for refuge.
gyalsé tendzin pakpé gendün la
In the Saṅgha, the Conqueror's children, holders of the teaching,
go sum güpa chenpö kyab su chi
Through the three doors I go for refuge.
Recite as much as possible. After:
lama chok dang könchok rinpoche
Supreme guru and precious Three Jewels,
nampa sum la chaktsal solwa deb
To you I pay homage and pray:
khyé kyi dak dang semchen tamché kyi
May you bless the three, body, speech and mind
lü ngak yi sum jingyi lab tu sol
Of all beings and myself.
dak lo chö su drowar jingyi lob
Bless my mind to approach the Dharma.
damchö lam du longpar jingyi lob
Bless my mind to accept the holy Dharma path.
lam gyi trulpa shyiwar jingyi lob
Bless my mind to pacify errors on the path.
trulnang ying su charwar jingyi lob
Bless my mind that mistaken appearances arise as space.
chö min namtok gakpar jingyi lob
Bless my mind that discursive non-Dharma thoughts are stopped.
jam dang nyingjé kyewar jingyi lob
Bless my mind that love and compassion may arise.
changchub sem nyi jongpar jingyi lob
Bless my mind that bodhicitta may be perfected.
nyurdu namkhyen tobpar jingyi lob
Bless my mind to quickly obtain omniscience.
Pray.
mar gyur khanyam semchen tamché kyi
For the benefit of all beings, once mothers, equal to space,
döndu lamé changchub tobpar ja
I must attain the highest enlightenment.
dé yi chedu sangye kün gyi lam
For that purpose I practice the profound yoga,
zabmö naljor nyam su langwar gyi
The path of all buddhas.
Recite three times.
om sobhawa shudhah sarwa dharma sobhawa shuddho ham
Oṃ svabhāva śuddha sarva dharma svabhāva śuddho ‘ham.
chöying tadral chenpö ngang nyi lé
From the great sphere of reality, limitless and free,
gödö natsok tsolwé rinchen tri
Bestowing various wishes is a jeweled throne,
khorwé nyepé ma gö pemé den
Unsullied by faults of saṃsāra – a lotus seat,
rangshyin ösal dawé kyilkhor teng
Naturally luminous – a moon maṇḍala.
daknyi sangye kün ngö chenrezik
Above, I arise as the nature of all buddhas, Avalokiteshvara,
drimé dung dang chushel tabü dok
In colour like stainless conch and crystal,
shintu yi ong dzum shyal shyi shying gek
Very resplendent, smiling, peaceful and radiant.
chak shyi dangpo tukkar talmo jar
With four hands – the first are folded at the heart,
ok ma shel treng norbu pema dzin
The lower hold a crystal mala and jeweled lotus –
rab dzé shyab nyi dorjé kyiltrung shyuk
Two beautiful feet seated in vajra posture;
yitrok dar dang rinchen dumé tré
Adorned with many attractive heavenly garments and jewels;
tönting ralpé tortsuk changlö dzé
Beautified with dark blue hair in tufts [some] loose.
gang dé chiwor sangye tamché kyi
On the crown of the head is the Lord, wisdom of all buddhas,
yeshe chikdü kyabné kün gyi tso
Source of all refuge gathered as one, in essence the Guru,
ngowo lama nampa öpakmé
In the aspect of Amitābha,
rikdak tsul du gyé shyin shyukpar gyur
In the manner of the Lord of the Family, seated happily.
rangnyi lha ku melong zuk shyin nang
I, in the form of the deity, am like the reflection in a mirror,
nangtong zungdu jukpa gyumé gar
The union of appearance-emptiness, a dance of illusion,
garkhen tar zang chaluk dumé dzé
Like an excellent dancer with many beautiful adornments.
dzé shing yi ong yi kyi nangnyen no
Beautiful and resplendent is the mental appearance.
Hold the mind for a while on the deity. Then, with single-pointed devotion to the guru:
kyabné kündü lama rinpoche
All sources of refuge combined, precious guru,
chomden deshyin shekpa drachompa
Bhagavan, tathāgata, arhat,
yangdak dzokpé sangye öpakmé
Samyaksambuddha, Amitābha,
dak la tsewé tuk kyi gong su sol
Regard me with a heart-mind of love;
lé ngen dikdrib dakpar jingyi lob
Blessings to purify bad actions, sins and obscurations;
tsok nyi nyurdu dzokpar jingyi lob
To quickly complete the two accumulations;
yangdak tingdzin kyewar jingyi lob
For the arising of perfect meditation
nyurdu sangye tobpar jingyi lob
And blessings to quickly obtain buddhahood.
From the depths of the heart pray three times.
khordé deduk kün la khyabpé chö
Saṃsāra, nirvāṇa, happiness and suffering, all are pervaded by dharmas;
chö nam kün gyi tsawa rang gi sem
Dharmas all, have as the root, just mind.
semnyi tak nakha dok yib su mé
Mind itself if examined, colour and shape are lacking;
mé chir chik dang dumé ngowö tong
Lacking therefore, singular and plural nature, it is empty.
tongpé wang gi kyegak né sumdral
Empty of the three, the power to arise, disintegrate or remain, it is free;
dral yang sal nang magak trö kün shyi
Free, yet clear appearance, unceasing, all elaborations pacified.
shyiwé semnyi tadral chenpo o
Pacified, mind itself is completely free from extremes.
Remain in a relaxed state free of mental activity.
nying ü pé dé tengdu hih yik tar
In the middle of the heart on a lotus and moon is the letter HRĪḤ
yik druk ngak kyi korwé özer gyi
Surrounded by the six-syllable mantra. Rays of light
gyalwé tukjé kul né dak jinlab
Invoke the compassion of the conquerors, blessing myself,
dro druk semchen nam kyi dön dzé gyur par sam la
Accomplishing the benefit of beings of the six-realms.
om mani padmé hung
oṃ maṇi padme hūṃ
Recite five hundred, etc.
den nam özer gyi nampar gyur né rang la tim par gyur
In conclusion, the throne etc., in the aspect of light rays dissolves into oneself, think.
gewa di yi dak sok semchen nam
By this merit may I and others,
tsé dir tsering nemé damchö den
In this life, have longevity, no illness and possess the Holy Dharma,
chima dewachen gyi shying kyé né
At death, be born in the field of Sukhāvatī
chenrezik wang gopang nyur tob shok
And quickly obtain the stage of Avalokiteśvara.

lü ngak yi sum lha ngak yeshe kyi
May the three, body, speech and mind,
khyer so sum dang namyang mindral bar
Never be free from carrying the three, deity, mantra and wisdom.
nyingjé wang gi semchen dönchö ching
With the power of compassion perform whatever benefits beings
gyalwé sé kyi chöpa drubpar shok
And accomplish the performance of a conqueror's son.

di chi bardö nekab tamché du
In this life, the next and the bardo, in all situations,
dren chok lama öpakmé gön gyi
May the supreme guide, Guru Amitābha, the Lord,
tukjé chakkyü namyang mi tongwar
Never release the hook of compassion
sishyi güpa kün lé kyob gyur chik
That removes the faults from all the troubles of existence and peace.
etc. Dedicate whatever is known and recite prayer-wishes. At all times think that the residence
is the field of Sukhāvatī. Think that oneself, in the pride of Avalokiteśvara, acts as
the servant of Guru Amitābha. With the doors of body, speech and mind not free of carrying
the three, etc. teach the accomplishment of great love for the benefit of beings.

This practice of “Great Compassion and Mahāmudrā In Union,” a precept of the Glorious Sakya
Fathers and Sons was requested from afar by my student Dragpa Gyaltsen – needing a meditation
of Mahākāruṇika in verse. This was written very quickly by the monk Konchog Lhundrub at
Ewam Choden and sent to Do-Kham in the eastern direction. Sarva maṅgalam.

| Translated by Jeff Watt, Vancouver, B.C., June 1, 1995. Revised May 18, 1999. First published
on Lotsawa House, 2021.

Source: sGrub Thabs Kun bTus, vol.3, fol.12–15.

Version: 1.0-20210903
↑ The homage here uses the Sanskrit version of the name of Könchok Lhundrup’s guru Könchok Pelwa
(dkon mchog 'phel ba, 1445–1514).